This document describes how libmysqlclient was packaged for build2. In
particular, this understanding will be useful when upgrading to a new upstream
version. See ../README-DEV for general notes on MySQL packaging.

Symlink the required upstream components and provide our own implementations
for auto-generated headers:

$ ln -s ../upstream/LICENSE

$ ln -s ../../upstream/{strings,vio,sql-common,sql,mysys,mysys_ssl,libbinlogevents,libmysql} \
  mysql

$ ln -s ../../upstream/include mysql/mysql

Note that we unable to generate mysql_version.h directly from the template as
it is included as "mysql_version.h" in upstream's source code, which makes
impossible using the header-generating machinery. That's why we create
mysql/mysql_version.h that includes <mysql/version.h> that we auto-generate
from upstream's mysql/mysql_version.h.in.

$ ln -s libbinlogevents/binlog_config.h.cmake mysql/binlog_config.h.cmake.orig

Use mysql/binlog_config.h.cmake.orig for creating mysql/binlog_config.h
manually, defining/undefining macros introduced with #cmakedefine.

$ ln -s ../../upstream/config.h.cmake mysql/config.h.cmake.orig

Use mysql/config.h.cmake.orig for creating mysql/my_config.h and
mysql/config.h.in, defining/undefining macros introduced with #cmakedefine.

Most of the macro values in mysql/my_config.h can be determined at the
preprocessing time using the pre-defined macros. To obtain the pre-defined
macros for gcc and clang run:

$ gcc -dM -E - < /dev/null
$ clang -dM -E - < /dev/null

Some macro values can not be easily determined at the preprocessing time. We
define them based on the supported platform tests and add mysql/assert.c,
containing compile-time assertions for the macros in question.

mysql/config.h.in defines macros that depend on the version and build2
configuration variables.

Note that if it is uneasy to define a macro, you may check if you really need
to, grepping for its usages, for example:

grep -e CPU_LEVEL1_DCACHE_LINESIZE `find -L . -name '*.c*' -o -name '*.h*'`

And it may become obvious that the macro is not used in libmysqlclient.

Re-creating mysql/my_config.h from scratch every time we upgrade to a new
upstream version would be a real pain. Instead we can only (un)define the
newly introduced macros, comparing the already defined and currently used
macro sets:

$ for m in `cat mysql/{config,binlog_config}.h.cmake.orig | \
            sed -n 's/.*#\s*\(define\|cmakedefine\)\s\{1,\}\([_a-zA-Z0-9]\{1,\}\)\(\s.*\)\{0,1\}$/\2/p' | sort -u`; do
    if grep -q -e "\b$m\b" `find -L . -name '*.h' -a ! -name my_config.h -a ! -name config.h -o -name '*.c' -o -name '*.cc' -a ! -name mysqld.cc -o -name '*.cpp' -o -name '*.hpp'`; then
      echo "$m"
    fi
  done >used-macros

$ cat mysql/my_config.h mysql/config.h.in mysql/binlog_config.h |
  sed -n 's/#\s*\(define\|undef\)\s\{1,\}\([_a-zA-Z0-9]\{1,\}\)\(\s.*\)\{0,1\}$/\2/p' |
  sort -u >defined-macros

$ diff defined-macros used-macros >diff-macros

Create mysql/libmysql_exports.def, containing the exported names list. For
that purpose grep through libmysql/CMakeLists.txt to see how the .def file is
generated for Windows. The corresponding code normally looks like:

MERGE_LIBRARIES_SHARED(libmysql ${LIBS_TO_MERGE}
  EXPORTS ${CLIENT_API_FUNCTIONS} ${CLIENT_API_FUNCTIONS_UNDOCUMENTED}
  COMPONENT SharedLibraries)

If that's the case, collect names that get assigned to the
CLIENT_API_FUNCTIONS and CLIENT_API_FUNCTIONS_UNDOCUMENTED variables.

Extract the auto-generated mysqld_error.h from Fedora's community-mysql-devel
package and copy it into mysql/:

$ wget https://rpmfind.net/linux/fedora/linux/development/rawhide/Everything/aarch64/os/Packages/c/community-mysql-devel-8.0.15-1.fc30.aarch64.rpm
$ rpm2cpio community-mysql-devel-8.0.15-1.fc30.aarch64.rpm | cpio -idv ./usr/include/mysql/mysqld_error.h

Deducing the source file set and compilation/linking options can probably be
performed by analyzing the root and component-specific CMakeLists.txt files
(see libmysql/, etc) and .cmake files under the upstream's cmake/
subdirectory. In practice, however, you may also need to refer to
cmake-generated flags.make files or, as a last resort, to see the actual
compiler and linker command lines in the build log (see ../README-DEV for
details).
